I had a pharmacist call me over there
the other day, and she leans in and she
said, "Did they do something electrical
to you?"
>> [laughter]
>> I don't even know what that is, but
either acid or electric shocks produce a
face that looks this hideous.
>> and you told her that you'd gotten on
the wrong side of like six different
mafias, and they'd all taken turns.
>> [music]
>> How would you live if you knew when you
were going to die? Former Republican
Senator [music] Ben Sasse of Nebraska
announced today that he has been
diagnosed with stage four pancreatic
cancer.
>> And is not expected to live much longer.
Ben Sasse served [music] in the United
States Senate for eight years, where he
was a civic-minded and, [music] by his
own account, somewhat ineffectual
senator.
>> We decided to forget what civics are and
allow politics to swallow everything.
>> What we need as a nation, more than
anything else, is more gratitude, not
more grievance. He left politics and
became president of the University of
Florida. This university must be a place
for big-hearted disagreement and open
dialogue. Today, he's facing his own
mortality,
>> [music]
>> which he thinks has given him clarity,
sharpening his focus on his wife and
three children, [music]
and on the God that he expects to
shortly meet.
But he's also doing a lot of talking.
Just had a piece in the Wall Street
Journal 3 days ago. Uh
it was written on morphine. We should
laugh at death. It's terrible, um but
it's not going to win. Death doesn't
[music] get the final
>> I love that. And he's doing interviews,
like this one, to talk about what life
is [music] like on the threshold of the
undiscovered country.
Ben Sasse, welcome to Interesting Times.
>> These are interesting times. Good to be
with you, Russ.
>> It's a pleasure to have you, and I want
to start uh with an important question,
which is
why are we here? And I don't mean why
we're here in this physical location.
Taping this in Austin, Texas. Um and I
also don't mean the cosmic question. I
think we'll get to that at the end. But
here, taping this conversation because
people facing a terminal diagnosis
have a lot of options, right? You know,
travel the world, scratch items off the
bucket list, seek out obscure therapies
in Western Tibet, just hunker down and
spend time with their families. And this
is not the first interview you've done.
You've chosen Let me put it this way.
You've chosen to spend time with
journalists. And we're grateful. But I
want to know why.
Well, you invited me. So, I assume you
had a cancellation. Let's [laughter] be
honest. I mean, the bar must be pretty
low if you're I mean, I'm probably here
for my looks, right? We have We have
actually [clears throat] clavicular, you
know, the looks maxer, scheduled and he
bailed. And so
>> Clavic is a word I've been learning a
lot lately, but I don't know this guy.
>> know about clavicular? Then then that is
actually one of the small the small
mercies of your own life. And we'll let
we'll let, you know, viewers figure out
for themselves who clavicular is. Um but
yeah, in all in all seriousness, you're
you're doing a lot of talking. You've
actually you've become a podcaster
yourself, right? You have a podcast.
>> Monty Python fan and I've been looking
to do IP theft on Not Dead Yet for a
long time and now I kind of got a way to
do that.
>> you have it. I I did not decide to die
in public. Um I obviously ended up with
a calling to die, but there's time to
redeem. Uh mid-December, I got a 3 to
4-month life expectancy.
And I'm a day 99 or something since
then. And I'm doing a heck of a lot
better than I was doing at Christmas.
But even at 3 to 4 months left to live,
you got to redeem the time and there's
only so many bits of unsolicited advice
I can give my children. So, you
journalists want to talk and I'm like,
well, if you don't know anybody better,
I'm your I'm your man. I'll be your
huckleberry. All right. All right. Well,
we are we are very grateful. Um
just
tell me a little bit about the diagnosis
and how you ended up
uh where you are right now. Uh
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> so, I'm I just turned 54. Um so, you get
into your 30s, 40s, and 50s and you're
like, how do I stay fit? And so, I used
to do a lot of sprint triathlons.
And this fall, I'd been training for for
some short tries and I ended up with a
ton of back pain and I realized, oh,
maybe it's stupid to be wearing the
45-lb weight vest all the time, not just
when you're training for running events,
but also on your bike cuz it turns out
that's not the right posture to be
wearing a lot of weight. And so, I ended
up late October, Halloween-ish, with a
lot of back and abdominal pain and I
thought I'd just pulled some ab muscles
from stupid forms of training.
>> [snorts]
>> But you you hadn't had any pain before
before this training.
>> the last couple days of October. But
over the course of November, I ended up
in significant enough pain that I I went
to my executive doc at the University of
Florida
um and I said, "Something's not right
here." And we did a bunch of tests,
couldn't couldn't find anything and they
said, "We're going to refer you to a GI
specialist. We're going to figure out
whether it's undiagnosed celiac or
you know, lactose intolerance or
something." And I said, "I'm I you know,
I'm a farm kid by upbringing, not the
toughest guy on Earth, but I I don't
have a cheese allergy. There's something
really, really wrong uh in my back." And
so, they sent me for full body scans on
the morning of December 13th or 14th and
they called me back 45 minutes later and
you could just hear them humming and
hawing
uh and I said, "Stop beating around the
bush. Like, give me give me a hard
fact." And they start talking about,
"Well, we don't want to We don't want to
be too premature, and there's been so
many changes in oncology care." And I'm
like, "Dude, you haven't even told me I
have cancer yet, and you're talking to
me to me about how great [clears throat]
oncology care is right
>> We We've had so many changes in oncology
care is never That's not true. From a
person who clearly is not shooting
straight. And I said, "Would you give me
a hard fact?" And he said, "Are you
sure?" And I said, "Yeah." He said, "I'm
going to pull He was driving, too. He
said, "I'm going to pull over off the
side of the road." And he said, um
"Here's the hard fact. Ben Sasse's torso
is chock-full of tumors." I was like,
"Okay. That You came in with the real
stuff." So, I uh I have pancreatic
cancer, stage four, already
metastasized. They told me right away on
day one, um this is not operable. You're
way post-surgical. Um they told me over
the course of the next couple of days
that I already have five forms of
cancer, a lymphoma, vascular,
um
uh
lung cancer, bad liver cancer, and
pancreatic where it originated. So, you
know, it was pretty clear that we're
dealing with a
short number of months left to live.
What did they tell you to do? What was
their advice? I said, uh
tutor me. I uh
I believe we're all on the clock. We're
all dying, so this is not the scariest
thing to me. I've always known that
we're going to be pushing up daisies
eventually. This is more finite. And I
have two kids out of the house. Our
daughters are 24 and 22, but our
providential surprise Our boy's a decade
younger, and I was immediately thinking
about Melissa, my best friend of 33
years. And uh and Augustine is our son,
but that's theologically heavy for 14.
It's hard to shout at a baseball or
football game. So, we call him Brecht.
So, I was thinking about Brecht, and uh
I said, "How do I navigate this moment?
I want the 101, you know, give me give
me oncology navigation."
>> [snorts]
>> They said, "Three broad categories.
There's radiation, there's surgery, and
there's chemo. There's chemo writ small
and chemo writ large. Chemo writ large
is, you know, carpet bombing your body's
ability to produce cells.
Um chemo writ small is, what does it
look like to try to do a targeted
therapy and get on a clinical trial? You
have a definite death sentence, but
there are some clinical trials that
could extend life a little bit. And I
said, "Teach me how that works." And
they said, "You want to figure out where
there's a genetic mutation potentially."
And so we did a bunch of procedures. We
ended up with nine successful biopsies.
In the next couple days, we sent them
off to labs all over the country, and we
found two genetic mutations. And it
turns out the two best places to do um
clinical trials around pancreatic are
Memorial Sloan Kettering in Upper East
Side,
uh or MD Anderson in Houston. My wife
and I flew to both places for 48 hours
in the next 6 days and met all the docs
and pounded on doors and said, "Teach us
what we got to do to get in this
automobile." And uh 2 weeks later we
were admitted to a clinical trial at MD
Anderson Houston. And uh we're
delivering super poison in my tumors and
trying to beat the hell out of them.
So we're having this conversation in
Austin, Texas, uh where you were a long
time ago, right, at UT Austin. And so
you're using this as a kind of family
base when you're doing the treatments in
Houston.
>> You got it.
>> So how intense are the treatments? How
much time are you spending
getting getting the tumors carpet
bombed?
>> Yeah. So we had been living in Florida.
Nebraska's emotional home and except for
heaven, eternal home. Uh
Austin is a community where we have a
church and a lot of friends, and it's 2
hours and 40 minutes from MD Anderson
Houston. And I am blessed that the uh
targeted clinical trial that I'm on only
requires me to be in Houston a max of 2
days a week, and sometimes a lot less
than that. Um so we decamp from Houston
to Austin most weeks. And so this week I
was in Houston on Monday, Tuesday. We're
recording on a Thursday. And how are you
getting the treatment? Is it chemo into
the vein? Is it Like what what are you
What are you literally doing?
>> There's a company in Silicon Valley
called Revolution Medicine and they have
a drug
called Darexon resab and that's my drug
and I'm able to take it orally as of
now. So, I don't have a
infusion port right now. So, I I take it
orally, but it's it's a nasty it's a
nasty drug. It causes crazy stuff like
my body can't grow skin and so I bleed
all out of a whole bunch of parts of me
that shouldn't be bleeding. Yeah. Yeah,
you look terrible.
>> Thank you.
>> How do you feel?
I feel better than I deserve.
I don't I don't know.
>> how do you how do you feel like in the
moment physically? Is it Are you in pain
all the time? Are you like do you feel
the cancer in your body? So, I I have a
really good hospice doc. I'm not dying
right now, but I'm you know, well in the
category that you can be in those
end-of-life months and she's
spectacular. She's just walking wisdom
and she she said to me early on, "When
you're dying of an abdominal disease,
you're really you got an algorithm
that's managing four variables. You have
tumor driven pain, you have cancer and
treatment driven nausea, you're managing
a diarrhea to constipation continuum and
you got energy and fatigue. She said,
"When you go talk to a doc, docs like to
especially those that don't have the
greatest bedside manner, they like to
talk about their specialty or they like
to get you off the issue you're talking
about so they can talk again." And she
said, "If you lead with any of your
>> I've never noticed that [laughter] about
our friends in the medical profession.
>> She said, "If you lead with any of your
four problems, there is a drug for that.
We can manage medicine can manage any of
those four problems, energy,
>> [snorts]
>> undercarriage,
um
nausea or pain, but the problem is the
drug will probably mess up the other
three variables. And so, you got got
figure out how you want to manage the
the variables." So, I was in a ton of
pain early on cuz I had some pancreatic
tumors that were essentially pushing on
my spinal column. And uh so, liver and
pancreas, rib cage in the front and
they're pushing out the back into my
into my spine. And uh I was on 55 mg of
morphine as soon as diagnosed and that's
you're high as a kite. And uh we drove
down my pain a lot, but since then the
drug has shrunk the tumors so much that
I could I was willing to dial back up a
little bit of pain to get a little bit
of energy back and to be able to have a
little more control of my nausea, etc.
So, I'm down to only about 30 mg a day
of morphine and I'd say my pain is, you
know, 80% reduced from where I started.
So, I manage nausea a lot. There's a,
you know, strong waves of desire to
puke. Um and when my face isn't
bleeding, I'm actually pretty good with
the puking. I mean, I don't like it, but
you can throw up and you're through it.
So, anyway, enough enough whining. But
that's But that's So, on a So, the pain,
let's say,
zero to 10 scale right now sitting here
talking to me.
>> Oh, it's not bad. It's not bad. Okay.
>> Yeah. Okay. And but it was up at like
eight.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
And how does your face and skin
feel? Nuclear. Yeah. Okay.
Like burning, bubbling. I was at a I
mean, I'm at a pharmacy every day,
right? Like I'm I'm I'm keeping a lot of
that industry employed right now. Um
you know, there's the drop-off part and
then there's the pick-up part, but
there's that little like weird curtain
in the corner that says consult?
>> [snorts]
>> I always figured that was just a place
to talk about STDs. Like I didn't know
what it was, but I just figured they
called you over there if there was like
some
>> [snorts]
>> Some sexual unusual wart. Yeah, exactly.
There's there's something growing here
that I don't know how to make sense of.
I had a pharmacist call me over there
the other day and and she pulls the
curtain. I don't know what's going on.
I'm like, do I have another problem I
don't even know about? And she leans in
and she said, "Did they do something
electrical to you?"
>> [laughter]
>> I don't even know what that is, but
either acid or electric shocks produce a
face that looks this hideous.
>> do you And you told her that you'd
gotten on the wrong side of like six
different mafias and they'd all taken
turns?
>> I said, "Listen, I was at the local
Walmart, and they're going to have to
get there get a handle on all those kids
with the bowls of acid running around
[laughter] in the aisles.
I'm a victim." So, the tumors are
smaller right now. Crazy smaller. My
tumors this week are down 76%
from December 29th.
Tumor volume in my torso is down 76%.
So, if they can knock tumor volume down
76%,
why can't they keep you alive for 20
years? Great question, and
>> [snorts]
>> I have to keep answering this one for my
mama. Yeah. No, I
I I can imagine that [snorts] some
people closer to you than I have had
that question.
The way it's been explained to me, and I
don't know squat about biology,
but the way it's been explained to me,
you could look out at your
lawn and say, "There are only six
dandelions out there. I could weed
those." Um and they say, "Yes, but look
at your neighbors to the north and to
the south. Both of their yards are
chock-full of dandelions.
Two or three or four mornings from now,
that's your yard. You've already seeded
everything." And so, even though my
pancreas tumors look on the scans like,
"Let's get these before and after images
blown up and put them on the wall."
They've already seeded so many other
kinds of cancer that it's probably just
not something you can ever catch up on.
There's too much whack-a-mole. Is there
anyone who's gotten better from stage
four? No, not the way that I have an
unbelievable team.
Shubham Pant and Bob Wolf are or of my
main lead oncologists at um MD Anderson
and they're rockstars. And they describe
their work as they're up here with a
little pickaxe on a giant Hoover Dam
working on pancreatic cancer and they
get little cracks at the top and
sometimes little bits of water splash
over and there's somebody else doing it
400 m over, another 300 m over there's
another team and there's somebody at
Memorial Sloan Kettering working on it.
And they said, "Someday these cracks are
going to go big and they're going to run
together and the dam will crash but
maybe 10 years." Okay. So, you're not
worried about a scenario where you do
all these interviews and then you have
to come back on this podcast in 5 years
and explain explain why you're still
alive. That's not April Fools.
>> Okay.
>> [laughter]
>> All right.
Well, I'm still going to I'm still
>> I think my kids might have that fear,
frankly. They right they they're like,
"Not another not another podcast, Dad."
Yeah. Um
All right. We're going to come back to
cancer and death and subjects like that.
>> I do want to start to create some memes
though. Like when I'm at MD Anderson,
wouldn't it be fun?
I have lung [snorts] cancer too now,
right? Um wouldn't it be fun to just
start smoking cigarettes outside the
front door of MD Anderson just have
people posting photos [laughter] of
that?
>> Well, you have for for for
for uh listeners and viewers who don't
know, there is a famous I don't know if
it's technically a meme but there's a
famous image of you when you were a
senator sitting outside the Senate. Were
you with Chuck Schumer? Right? So,
what's crazy is that the photographer
who I later found out was hiding behind
a tree for like an hour. This is what
journalism is. This is the Senate.
Like this is this is the hunt. I'm not
interesting but he was on a hunt. And
so, I'm an early to bed I mean, I sleep
all the time now but I used to be a 9:00
to bed guy, 4:00 a.m. wake up. I did a
bunch of writing, I did a did a workout
but by about [snorts] 8:00 a.m. I would
call and be a part of family worship
around the breakfast table back in
Nebraska as they were waking up and
getting to go going. And so people
arriving in suits might think I'm
slothful and just woke up. I've already
got 4 hours in. But I would sit outside
a staff and senator door entrance to the
Russell building where my office was
where I'd come out of the gym and I look
like a dude who just either woke up hung
over or just worked out.
And I was wearing Umbro shorts 30 years
out of date, you know?
But I was sitting there and a lot of my
colleagues are coming in and we end up
in a series of conversations where
Schumer is standing there perennially.
Right. And he's
he's fully in his full majority minority
leader suit. Right.
>> of times he'd come in not having yet
showered but wearing the suit that he
was going to wear for the day but he's
got full on, you know, bedhead.
Chuck's standing there and I'm
[clears throat] sitting on this marble
rail and a series of people
Tom Cotton, John McCain, a whole bunch
of different fellows come by but Chuck
and I are sitting
But Schumer talks with his hands like,
you know, very Brooklyn and his hands
are waving around and there's this piece
of, you know, metal that's off the
Russell building that looks like a giant
joint. And because he keeps talking with
his hands at different points it looks
like he's got, you know, a 13-in reefer
hanging out of his hand and I'm talking
there clearly just, you know, high
outside of a wedding and McCain is
buttoned up. Tom Cotton is buttoned up.
It became a very fun meme and people
still give me versions of it as like
Christmas ornaments. That's good. Well,
we need to get someone to Photoshop just
as you were gesturing there a giant
blunt into your hand and this can be the
equivalent of that was it Joe Rogan
where Elon Musk was was smoking up,
right? So, you know, in interesting
times there's some high times
interesting times crossover we can do
with this meme. Yeah, well done. get
we'll get our people to work on it.
You've got other more pressing concerns.
All right, before we before we talk more
about
you know, human mortality and yours
specifically,
now that you're dying,
as far as we know, it's a natural time
to ask you big important questions about
American politics and your experience
thereof. And you're, you know, you have
special wisdom.
Because, you know, Because you're dying.
Because you're not 54, you become 94
years old. You become 94. You're like
you're like you're where Henry Kissinger
was at 100. All right, I'll let I'll let
the I'll let that thread drop. So,
>> [snorts]
>> let's talk about your political
career and what you think about US
politics, what it taught you about US
politics. I was in a room, I don't know,
like a week or 10 days ago, um with a
bunch of very high-minded academics, uh
many of them sort of centrist and
center-right, a very, you know, small
tribe, right? And for some reason the
conversation turned to the future of the
Republican Party. And one of these
academics said, in a kind of hopeful
voice, "I don't suppose there's any
chance that we'll get a second act for
Ben Sasse."
And there was sort of this pause, and
then I had to be the one who said,
"Well, probably not." It's a low
>> [laughter]
>> It's a low I wouldn't go on, you know,
Kalshi or Polymarket and bet on that.
No, More morphine for the lot of you.
More morphine. The person The this
person had not heard about your cancer
diagnosis. But I I did think that moment
was a good way of thinking about your
own constituency in politics, which was
there were people who loved Ben Sasse,
um and they tended to be what you might
call sort of
civic-minded, not super partisan
conservative centrists and a few
liberals. But also for a lot of those
people, I think your career was kind of
a case study in the limits of
a sort of
certain kind of civic-minded politics in
a more populist age. So, just first of
all, just tell me why you ran for office
in the first place. You'd done health
policy, you'd been president of a small
college. Why did you decide to become a
United States Senator?
Well, I get drafted into it partly
because I was president of a place
called Midland University, a Lutheran
liberal arts college in Nebraska and we
were we had a great team. I got too much
credit as if I was Midas, but really I
put together a good team and we did a
turnaround of a 130-year-old place that
[snorts] was in real financial trouble
and then it was booming. And so the
alumni of Midland, go Warriors,
uh ended up kind of drafting me into the
Senate race in 2013 when there was going
to be a vacancy in 2014. Mike Johann's a
very successful um US Secretary of
Agriculture, two-term governor of
Nebraska, new senator, surprised people
by retiring at the end of his first term
and there wasn't expected to be an open
Senate seat in Nebraska. I wasn't
planning to run for anything. I've never
run for anything before in my life
and I got drafted um to run for that and
I thought it'd be kind of fun to live on
a campaign bus. Uh my kids were 12, 10,
and 2. I didn't know that I wanted to be
a politician, but I thought it'd be fun
to be a candidate for a while. Uh
Nebraska has 93 counties and we went and
pounded it. We did, you know, public
events in all 93 counties and I don't
say that to be self-serving. I say it to
mean that
not having intended to be a politician
and just having a real conversation with
my neighbors. Nebraska has only 2
million people, it's a lot of area to
cover, but only 2 million people and I
pretty much got to know everybody. So,
we had a great time as a family on the
campaign trail, but I just want to
acknowledge I wasn't a very good
politician. Um I
am way too idealistic about what I
believe in America to be a very good
deal maker and if I had it to do over
again, I would um be a little more
pragmatic realist about some of the
deal-making needs. But [snorts] big
picture, you said what did I learn?
Well, just just pause there. When
when you got into the Senate, every
senator gives a maiden speech. Um and
you I waited a year cuz it was the old
tradition.
>> you waited a year be right and which was
itself I think an example of
what the Ben Sasse brand was at that
moment. Just just
tell tell listeners and viewers what you
said in that speech roughly.
I said the voters hate us all. The
people despise us all.
And why is this?
Because we're not doing our job. We're
not doing the primary things that the
people sent us here to do. We're not
tackling the great national problems
that worry our bosses at home. At the
end of the day, this place at that
point, this is
uh
Thanksgiving of 2015.
Um
the tribalism of, you know,
or even 2017 wasn't as apparent in 2015,
but it was bubbling up fast. And people
involved in politics love to do
nitpicking about the crazy people at the
other end of the continuum that aren't
in their party and there's a lot of
truth to that, but it's a definite
subordinate story in my mind to the big
things that are really happening. And so
I in that speech, I just kind of wanted
to contrast the idea that the public
approval numbers for Congress bounced
around between 9 and 15%.
When you ask people objectively, what do
they think? They think everybody here's
bad at the job. It isn't that
Republicans are right that Democrats
stink and Democrats are right that
Republicans stink. It's that these
institutions are not working very well
at all. And so the historian in me says
75 or 100 years from now when you look
back on our moment, um we're not going
to talk about politics at all. Um, what
we're going to talk about is the fact
that we were living through a
technological revolution that was
creating economic and cultural upheaval
and we were living through institutional
collapse and way, way, way, way, way
below that there's a whole bunch of
political institutions that are part of
that institutional collapse, but what's
really happening is these super devices
in our pockets, the largest tools any
median individuals ever had access to in
all of human history, allow our
consciousness to leave the time and
place where we actually live, the places
where we break bread, the people who are
living next door to us, um, the people
you can physically touch and hug, the
small platoons of real community and we
allow our consciousness to go really far
away and there are things that are
awesome about the digital revolution.
We're the richest people anytime and
place in all of human history, but there
are also things that are horrific about
this and we don't yet know how to
navigate the economic and cultural and
familial disruptions that are coming
from this technology and politicians act
like because they work in politics that
politics are the center of this.
Politics barely matters for what we're
going through right now and this
institution is filled with blowhards.
This is the Senate should be the world's
greatest deliberative body, um, was
filled with blowhards that want to
pretend whatever we're screaming about
in a partisan tribal way is really
essential and central and it's a really
peripheral thing almost every single day
and I think we should actually start to
tell the truth about what it would look
like to have an institutional recovery
in the Senate. But what would it look
like cuz what you've just described
is a narrative that makes politicians
seem pretty small and I'm sympathetic to
that narrative, but
you know, I also write about politics
for a living. I at least pretend to give
advice to politicians. You just said
before that maybe you were too
idealistic and needed to think more
about you know, the nitty-gritty of deal
making, but is that the advice? Like
what what after 8 years in the Senate
like say you were meeting someone who
was just elected Yeah. US Senator from
Nebraska and you were giving them a
couple of pieces of advice.
What would you say? Well, I don't want
to be
parochial about this or self-serving,
but I'll I'll I'll go from my personal
experience a tiny little bit.
>> [snorts]
>> Um again, Nebraska's only 2 million
people. I don't mean it's generalizable
and it would work as an electoral
strategy in California, Texas, New York.
But I got elected in November of '14 and
again it I was 93 and 0 across 93
counties in Nebraska in that general,
which means as a Republican I won Omaha.
Um I I should define myself. At a policy
level, I'm very conservative. At a
dispositional and tonal level, I'm a
moderate because I believe that American
civics and the glories of being able to
inherit a constitutional doctrine of
anti-majoritarianism
and restraints and a belief in
pluralism, that this stuff is so
glorious. It's so much more interesting
and important than our policy
differences about one versus two cheers
for this level of government
intervention in the economy or
regulatory X, Y, or Z. So the policy
fighting is so subordinate my mind to
the civic transmission obligations that
we have that I won the whole continuum
in Nebraska from very far right to
pretty center left in all four of my
elections, two primaries and two
generals. And yet I was constantly
condemned by my party and it did start a
little bit pre-Trump because I got
elected in '14, took office in '15, and
by the end of '15 I was a little bit in
trouble with my party at home for not
hating Democrats enough. And I was like,
but I don't. Like, there are 330 million
Americans. What was just what was a
concrete
what was a concrete example of that?
That Like I didn't
>> party was pissed about.
>> I didn't spend time going on the
angriest tribal media channels to say
that Obama, you know, wasn't born in the
US. Right? Like the the conspiracy
theory versions of stuff became a really
important marker for people to say I
really dislike those other people. It
was like what I care about is the Ronald
Reagan impulse to say freedom is never
more than one generation away from
extinction and you don't pass it along
in the bloodstream, you pass it along
cuz we teach it and we haven't teaching
it since sometime between the late 60s
and the early 80s. Like our civics
experience is in collapse and at this
point when I would talk about what was
happening on college campuses and much
worse over the in the decade since, but
at that point there was some polling
that showed just over 35% of American
college kids thought the first amendment
was dangerous
because you might use your freedom of
speech to say something that hurt
somebody else's feelings. The whole dang
point of America. The point of America
is that we lay down our weapons outside
the tent and you go into the tent and
you say speech cannot be violence and
violence is not a form of speech. What
we believe here is that everybody is
created in the image of God. They have
um universal rights. Like we need to
celebrate the American civic tradition
together and we weren't doing any of
that, but I was in trouble with some of
my voters for not being angry enough
about something Barack Obama had just
done. But to your point
>> is the Well, is the is the problem then
that
there's sort of this widespread
collapse of interest in or understanding
of American civic values or is it
primarily a problem where
most people are still on board with
those values, hence, you know, Ben Sasse
can win liberal-leaning Omaha while also
winning deep Republican counties, but
people who are sort of professionally
tribally engaged in politics
are sort of tearing the country apart.
Is that
>> weirdos are crowding everybody else out.
Right? I think that the professional
political
activists and consumer class, those who
allow it to become a core community, are
weird enough
that almost all of our channels are
narrow but deep. New York Times
obviously still has millions and
millions of You don't have to flatter
You don't have to flatter us. But there
aren't there there aren't
>> We we have we have weird, you know,
weird subscribers, too.
>> I think there's a ton of fan service
that happens in The New York Times. Um
but all of our outlets have an incentive
to go narrow and deep because there
isn't any 60% audience that's ever going
to exist again post digital revolution.
I I My analogous way of thinking about
it as the son of a football coach is
when we went from three channels to four
channels in the 1980s, not Fox News but
Fox local. When we went from three to
four channels, it was pretty great cuz
it meant on Saturday afternoon you got
another football game. When we went from
four channels to 500 channels, it seemed
pretty great. When we go from 500
channels to 2,000 channels,
it's pretty obvious that every
individual can find something that they
think they really want to watch, but it
means tomorrow around the water cooler
you don't have anything in common that
anybody else watched together. I Love
Lucy wasn't important content, but it
was shared content and it meant that
tomorrow morning you had a whole bunch
of topics you could go to with your
neighbor or your coworker that was just
shared cultural data. And we don't have
any of that anymore. And so in a world
where everybody is incentivized to go
narrow but deep, there there's not a lot
of need to call out BS and crazy on your
own end of the continuum. There's a ton
of incentive for both political addicts
on the right to find some nut job on the
left who did or said something crazy.
They're all going to grab our guns. Or
there's some nut job on the left who
wants to everybody on the right wants to
do this horrible thing to you because
they found some idiot on Twitter or on a
podcast who said that thing. And the the
problem with that kind of nut picking is
it doesn't ever solve a problem and it
does create a delusional othering of the
rest of your community, but it also
takes the whole middle and said these
freaks are not people you should really
pay attention to. So, this seems like
though
like for for politicians, for the you
know, the next the next would be Ben
Sasse, the next high-minded,
civic-minded senator. This seems like a
pretty pessimistic description. So, is
there some concrete
response to this from politicians? Well,
I I do think in Nebraska, I think you
could do a long-term version of what I
did for
you know, less than two terms, but but
two full election cycles, two primaries,
two generals, which is despite the fact
that it looked like the most politically
addicted people really, really disliked
me. The voters did like me because I was
a dad first. I was a husband. I was a
Christian. I was a Husker sports addict.
Um I was talking about the technological
disruptions to the nature of their work,
but I never pretended there was a piece
of legislation that the day after
tomorrow apocalypticism
or salvation is coming by legislative
process. That's and I would
never lie to my people like that and
they know it's and they don't
want to be lied to. And so, they're
they're like, "Why can't politics do a
small number of important long-term
things, tell the truth about the fisc,
figure out what our national security
priorities should be, do a small number
of things, shut up and get off the
stage?" And I think normie politicians
have an opportunity at least in small
enough electorates where people can get
to know who you are as a person. Again,
I don't I don't know that this works if
you got all the media markets of
California, but I think it's possible.
Big picture,
15 years, 25 years from now, does the
republic survive or not?
I think it's an open question. But I
think we do. But if we survive, one
thing that I'm nearly certain of is we
will figure out how to have discussions
in spite of all of the noise of social
media chaos of a lot of lying and a lot
of screaming and just a whole lot of
conspiracy stupid all across the
continuum. There's going to be a lot
more normies who show up and roll their
eyes and say, "Yeah,
Grandma, I know you got a text that, you
know, some terrible thing's going to
happen if you don't click this link by
tomorrow." We've figured out how to deal
with a lot of that kind of fraud on your
digital devices. A lot of that so-called
content is also fraudulent nonsense. And
people are going to figure out how to
tune out more of the fan service crazy
that says, "Only bad people are at the
other end of the continuum." Now,
there's some crazy people everywhere.
But people Always have been. But people
do
not just sort of the extreme I mean
there is a a horrible way in which
people
like that. Right? Like it's not just
people are
>> Dopamine hits. Right. It's Well, it's
dopamine hits, but also, you know,
there's a
famous C.S. Lewis quote, right, about
the man who, you know, reads the
newspaper and learns that his enemies
overseas have committed atrocities. And
then he reads another story that says
actually maybe there were fewer
atrocities committed, right? And there's
part of him that's disappointed.
>> It's disappointed, right?
Um And there is some way in which people
respond to the idea that their enemies
are even worse than they imagined
before, right? I mean, I've I've watched
this happen just with the the Jeffrey
Epstein stuff where
as a conservative I lived for a long
time with people on the right who were
obsessed with Jeffrey Epstein. And I had
my own have my, you know, I I have I
have my own sort of moderate moderate
conspiracy theories about it. Um but
then as soon as Epstein as soon as it
became about Donald Trump, right? There
was this flip that happened. And
suddenly I had all of these liberal
friends for whom it was like this this
story was amazing. They'd never thought
about it before, but now it was
occupying all this brain space because
it became
a way to
think that you know, think that the
other side was bad. And I feel like
there's an element of that where it's
just a very hard it's just such a part
of human nature, right? That it's
it's challenging
challenging to deal with. Um
why didn't you stick around?
If you thought there if you thought this
model was workable that you could have
been reelected in spite of having the
base of your party mad at you, why did
you leave?
It's a little weird to say when you've
just gotten an actual terminal
diagnosis, but I will confess that I've
always felt mortality heavy on my
shoulders. I've always thought time was
short. And [snorts] the Senate is a very
very very important institution, has
been in the past, and it will be again
in the future. I'm relatively confident.
But it doesn't do anything right now.
And so when you have kids and you've
watched two of the three of them
graduate out and go two-thirds empty
nester while you were commuting every
week and you still have another kid left
with you,
and you just think it's super unlikely
that the Senate's going to tackle any
real stuff this year or next year or the
year after that or the year after that,
like why am I still doing this? And so I
had been recruited for a few college
presidencies, and none of them seemed
like the right fit, and I was in the
process of running for reelection, etc.
But ultimately, I left the Senate for
the opportunity to help steer the
University of Florida for a time. Um
and um And was it great to leave
politics for a world of
friendliness,
>> [laughter]
>> ideological comedy. Everybody loves
higher education. I mean, this must have
been a big relief, right? To to go We
are doing this interview. We're we're
recording in Austin and I was on faculty
at the University of Texas at Austin
from 2004 to 2009 and I remember the old
quote, you know, it's attributed to
dozens of people, but one of them is
Kissinger. Um academic [snorts] politics
are the most brutal cuz the stakes are
so small. I remember when I was on
faculty, I'm a historian by training,
but I taught at the Lyndon Johnson
School of Public Affairs um
in the aughts and we were going through
a building renovation and we had some
faculty members basically chain
themselves to the dean's desk because
one of them was going to go from 16 and
a half feet of window to 15 feet of
window. Going to lose like 18 inches of
window. And it was Well, but their their
I assume their departmental rival was
getting Exactly.
>> foot of glass, right? If I was losing a
foot, but you were losing two feet,
fine. But not if I lose Not if I and you
gain. Um
Academia is a total mess, obviously. And
yet we need institutions to help people
go from being 15 to 17 to 19 to 21. You
got to do home leaving, you got to do
family formation, you got to do first
job, you got to do uh
a a ton of habit and character formation
stuff. And higher education could be a
really, really useful transitional
institution. Right now, it enables lots
of
endlessly deferred adolescent behaviors
and not enough rigor um and not enough
clarity about either research or
teaching or character formation, but we
need to build new institutions in that
space and that was appealing. Tell me
just a little bit about um
the part of your job at Florida that was
sort of
connected to this larger effort by
conservatives to kind of perform some
kind of transformation of more liberal
academic institutions.
You know, University of Florida started
the Hamilton Center, right? Which is one
of these sort of institutes
>> Very special place. civic thought but
that sort of double as places where
people with moderate and right of center
views can get hired. Just tell me tell
me how you think or what you think about
that
project.
So, uh lots of people deserve credit uh
for the founding of the Hamilton Center,
became Hamilton School, will eventually
be some form of Hamilton College. Um
I I think it's worth backing up one step
to
one of the inherent tensions in the
American research university. The
American research university is a hybrid
of an English teaching college model,
Oxbridge, um and a German research
institute model. And there's a lot about
that that's great. One of the things
that's always a little under resolved is
is our are our research universities for
preparing people for life or preparing
people for jobs. The right answer should
be yes, both. Um we should be preparing
the mind and the character for all of
the various vocations and callings in
life and also to be prepared for the
first job, but also for the third job in
an industry that doesn't even exist yet
and won't for 15 or 20 years. And so, we
need a lot more rigor. We need a lot
more both and. So many universities have
had liberal arts colleges captured by
ideological activists that really only
want to speak to eight or 10 or 17 other
ideological activists that liberal arts
colleges, and I say this as a historian,
I say this as somebody who loves the
liberal arts, have so obviously
abnegated any responsibility for
preparing a next generation that we're
now five consecutive decades into higher
ed in America having students choose by
major, voting with their feet, to move
from liberal arts majors to more STEM
majors. Five consecutive decades
students migrating from liberal arts
towards STEM disciplines. But the
liberal arts, instead of then saying,
"Well, let's use the core curriculum as
a way to prepare people for the rest of
life, not just the jobs that they may
have that may be in engineering or
health professions or whatever." Um
getting smaller and smaller and smaller
and smaller. And their power, the power
of those faculties, are increasingly
just to compel students to take their
classes through the core curriculum.
But the classes aren't very good. They
aren't very big. Uh they aren't very
rigorous. But they aren't big in terms
of grand questions. They're not trying
to help people fall in love with the
good, the true, and the beautiful. The
answer is not to hate on the liberal
arts. The answer is to recover the
liberal arts.
>> Which is and just
we'll talk about the left in in in a
sec, but there is a conservative
temptation, I think, that you as a
politician and a academic, I'm sure have
seen, to look at that story and say,
"Oh, we should just accelerate the
process, right? The liberal arts are all
just sort of socialist identity
politics, you know, deconstructionist
rot, and let's just cut their budgets,
right? And just, you know, encourage
people onto pure pre-professional
vocational
tracks." I I feel like you see that from
a lot from a certain kind of Republican
politician.
>> all down. Right, is the impulse of a
lot. Right, and just leave the business
school standing, right? So, how do you
persuade conservatives that they need to
be invested in these institutions?
>> One of the ways is by building a better
college liberal arts, which is
functionally what Hamilton is.
Um and so you asked, "What do I think of
this project?" There have been a There
have been a lot of these schools.
They're very important um as reform uh,
germs, but what you really want is to go
much bigger and say, "What What does
great history look like? Why is it that
almost all the history books that show
up on a New York Times best-seller list
are written by people that are not
practicing historians in academic
departments?" Because they want to write
identity politics narrow narrow narrow
narrow narrow questions that aren't ever
going to be read by people. And you
really want to ask questions about why
does a
generally educated American adult
citizen neighbor voter lover, um, need
to read history? What is the point of
learning history? You're not going to
hear that argument in most history
departments right now. And so, what
you'd like to see is great history,
great literature, great love for music
and the arts, et cetera. And those
things are not being done in
universities right now by and large.
Let's build better liberal arts colleges
at the center of these institutions. Do
you think you can get
buy-in from for that project from people
who aren't conservatives or conservative
sympathizers within academia?
Well, I'll I'll I'll give you an
example. Um,
when we at Hamilton, when I got there, I
think Hamilton had, uh, so many, I mean,
thousands of applicants and lots of them
were Ivy League liberals. Professors who
taught in, you know, the most
prestigious universities in big
departments and they would quietly reach
out like they you know, something
scandalous. Do you think I would be
considered if I applied for a job at
Hamilton? And they had the idea that had
been repeated by some lazy media that
Hamilton was a conservative project.
Hamilton wasn't a conservative project.
Hamilton was a liberal arts project.
>> Wait. But it it was a conservative
political project, right? Just just in
the sense that in the sense that the
people it
the people who wanted it the most, like
the instigators and originators of the
idea, some of them were classical
liberals, you know, plenty of them
didn't vote for Donald Trump, but it was
still clearly a kind of right coded,
conservative coded project, right? I'm
not I'm not I'm I agree with you I agree
with you.
>> does that make you a conservative? I
mean, under certain current academic
conditions,
that is coded as conservative and the
people if you the people I mean, you
were in charge, right? You were a
Republican senator brought in to be
president of the University of Florida.
I'm just saying like I'm not I'm not
disagreeing with you that that this
perspective and approach should be able
to bring in people who are not
conservative. I'm just saying
it is [snorts] part of part of the
challenge
>> litmus test for hiring for anybody in
any of those disciplines. Right. I'm
just saying part of the challenge is
that is you know, if you're in a red
state, then it's sometimes it's coming
out of,
you know, Republican policy making in
the state legislature and so on, right?
Like there is
the the ideological element is there and
it's sort of what you're trying to
transcend, right?
>> Fair but I think the 101 question is,
what is the best use of 45 months of an
18 to 22-year-old's time? Why would we
compel people to do anything? It better
dang well benefit them and benefit the
broader society in terms of the economic
output they're going to produce, but
more importantly,
uh the civic engagement that they're
going to be able to have and the love of
neighbor and the engagement with you
know,
a republic, a small small r um
republic of pluralists who say, "We
don't want a polity that's based on
power. We want a whole bunch of people
who want to flourish and thrive and
build great things in their community."
And that requires you to be acquainted
with some of the wonderful ideas and
with beauty in the past and most of that
is way more interesting than anything
that is pre-political. Yeah. One I mean,
one thing that has made me
maybe more optimistic about this kind of
save the humanities project is actually
watching left-wing academia react to
artificial intelligence. Mhm. Where
in part part of the reaction I think is
mistaken. I think there's part of the
reaction that underrates the technology
and wants to say, you know, it's not
that important. And it's all fakery.
It's just Silicon Valley hype. I think
that part is wrong, but there is also a
reaction I've seen that is a kind of
humanist reaction that is sort of trying
to emphasize Mhm. human exceptionalism.
Mhm. has not been where I think parts of
the academic left have been. And it's
made me wonder whether yeah, there is a
kind of
you know, a kind of left-right humanist
dialogue around I mean, just the bigger
question that I I, you know, I know you
have thoughts on cuz, you know, you were
talking earlier about sort of the
technological challenge we're living
through, right? But where, you know, the
question of just like, what is a human
being? And what what makes human beings
distinct from
a computer, a machine, these kind of
things, right? Those seem like questions
that are maybe get us out of
current polarization a little bit. What
What do you think? W- Well well said. I
um
>> [snorts]
>> Uh
I- In in my pre-cancer life where you
sometimes, you know, dance for your
dinner or or raise money for a
university, and
you're asked to give general speeches on
a lot of topics. It's you know, 90% of
the time somebody will ask you some
version of the question.
Do you think AI is going to bring heaven
or AI is going to bring hell?
And the right answer is yes.
Um AI is going to be human activity and
behavior at warp speed for good and for
ill. And a lot of the stuff that we've
been good at, we're going to get more of
it faster, cheaper, and and more broadly
distributed. But a lot of what's
horrible about human
addictions and distractions, we're also
going to get a lot more of it faster,
cheaper, more ubiquitous.
And I think the grand divide that is
coming
sociologically or demographically is not
um
chiefly a class divide. I think the
grand divide that's coming is about
intentionality
and what you do with your affections and
these super tools.
Um
the people who
use the tools and get to capture the
ability to drive
marginal computing costs toward zero,
right? We're we're either going to make
um
the quantification of routinizable tasks
either actually free or so close to free
that we won't bother to meter it
anymore. That's going to be
extraordinary. It's going to be a
transformation of the way economics has
worked for human history past. Economics
was a discipline about scarcity.
Economics is going to become a
discipline about ubiquitous abundance.
Or
you're people who agree to outsource
your attention and affections to
somebody else's algorithm.
That's hell.
Who would have ever thought that we'd be
living in a sex collapse?
Less premarital sex, less extramarital
sex, less marital sex because people are
so addicted to not just pornography
proper, but just digital distraction
from bodily goodness. That's weird. And
I think that the digital revolution that
we're going to live through is going to
bring all of that at faster speed. For a
small number of people with lots of
intentionality, lots of habits, and
thick communities of accountability and
Sabbaths,
um these tools are going to probably be
pretty great. For the majority of
people, I think they're going to be
disastrous. What do you try and give to
the normal people in that scenario? Is
it a different philosophy of life? Is it
a religious vision? Like what if it's an
80/20 scenario where it's heaven for 20%
and hell for 80%?
What's
the path up for the 80%?
Communities that can do um
shared deferred gratification, that can
say self-discipline, self-restraint,
um self-control
are the only antidotes to other
constraint other discipline and others
control.
And so, I think we want to think very,
very intentionally about our affections.
What are your loves?
We have to think deeply about
rank-ordered loves, and I don't think we
do that right now. And I think our our
temptation to allow these tools to
algorithmically
tempt me into an eternal now now now now
now now slot machine of dopamine hits,
super dangerous.
We have been for 150 years tempted
toward generational segregation, which
loses wisdom.
Meaning the young don't encounter the
old and vice and vice versa actually.
>> Exactly. I I think that in in my
pantheon of American, you know, greats
and villains, um
we radically underappreciate the
downsides of John Dewey. I think John
Dewey did many, many, many, many
terrible things, and one of them was
say, "Well, the economy went from kind
of um
craft work and agriculture to
industrialized scale. We should make
childhood on an industrialized scale,
and we should institutionalize children
for the vast majority of the time. Uh
indoors, sitting still,
>> [snorts]
>> um passive, mother may I, and only
around people with their same birth
year. One of the least significant
factors about life is people that just
happen to have my same birth year.
Except when you're 14 or 16, then it's
really terrible because our frontal
lobes aren't done, and what a horrible
thing to segregate 16-year-olds only
with 16-year-olds. Those people are
idiots. Um and they deserve the benefits
of 80-year-old wisdom, and by the way,
80-year-olds deserve the benefits of the
reward of seeing 16-year-old vitality
again. One of the things I think the
digital revolution does is it takes our
generational segregation and puts it on
speed, and we lose lots of wisdom. We
need a lot more communitarian thickness
to get at some of these self-restraints
and self-controls that can use the tools
instead of being used by the tools.
Let's talk about your labs.
Your little platoons. Mhm.
>> [clears throat]
>> Um
I've never had a cancer diagnosis. Uh I
was very ill a while, you know, 5 7 10
years ago, and early on in that, I had a
bunch of phantom heart attacks where,
you know, I went to the emergency room,
and I would think briefly that I was
going to die.
And what was striking in those moments
was actually how little I was of
personally afraid of my own mortality,
and how much fear I had about my family
Mhm. and my kids.
Your kids are older now than mine were
then. Two of them are
grown or as grow you know, as grown as
young people can be, right? But
just tell me how you're thinking about
your relationship to them and your own
family life in the shadow of death.
I got my diagnosis in mid-December and
similar to when you were going through
your health um episodes, I was um
incredibly blessed to be quickly at
peace. I kept hearing the Pauline phrase
um to live is Christ, to die is gain.
Um and death is terrible. I we should
never sugarcoat it. Um it is not how
things are meant to be.
But it is great that death can be called
the final enemy. It's an enemy, but it's
a final enemy and there will then be no
more tears. Um I believe in the
resurrection and I believe in a
restoration of this world and so I did
not um
feel great fear about my death. I didn't
want the pain I was going through. I
didn't want to be a pansy ass um
you know, at the in the in the final
moments. You're doing okay right now.
>> to I I am I am doing okay. So far. Oh,
thank you. Uh but I did immediately feel
um regrets about a lot of
misprioritization. You jokingly referred
earlier to my podcast which takes its
line from Monty Python, Not Dead Yet. Um
we're all on the clock and I um
wanted to have prioritized better. And
whether I really only had three or four
months left or if I get nine to 12
months left, I want to prioritize better
from then. But in in my tradition in in
Christianity, the the need for daily
repentance is just a truth. I am broken.
I leave undone those things which I
ought to have done and I do those things
which I have not done.
You know what? Morphine. Um and there is
no health in us. And I get to repent
every day of both my sins of omission
and commission. And yet, at a slightly
bigger level, if you're only going to
get three or four months, you really
want to get some of your affairs in
order. And my boy was only 14, and I
felt a heaviness. I knew that God wasn't
surprised by the diagnosis. Um this
There is not a maverick molecule in the
universe, but I didn't like the idea of
my 14-year-old son not having a dad
around at 16. I didn't like the idea of
my daughters, who are 22 and 24, um not
having their dad there to walk them down
the aisle. And um I I felt a real
heaviness about that. Um
but I've continued to feel a peace about
the fact that death is something that we
should hate. We should call it a wicked
thief, and yet it's pretty good that you
pass through the veil of tears one time,
and then there will be no more tears.
There will be no more cancer.
Can I ask
how [snorts] you think your kids are
processing the experience?
Um they have a great mom, and uh they
are theologically rooted, and their hope
is in Jesus, and they um
all three are doing really well. Um my
girls are 22 and 24,
and I know that our conversations are
the true and accurate conversations. My
14-year-old son uh is gritty enough and
tough enough that I think even if he
wasn't doing well, he could probably
fake it. Yes.
>> So, I don't fully know, so I covet
prayers on that, but he he seems to be
doing well.
Just on the, you know,
front of
having something like this change how
you think about your own priorities,
is there advice that you would give to
someone who is, you know,
the Ben Sasse, father of three at age 40
or age 35, when the kids are young and
everything stressful and chaotic,
in light of where you are now? Happy to
go fire hose on this one. Uh number one,
honor the Sabbath and keep it holy. Man,
I wish I'd treated the Lord's day
differently over the course of my life.
I've always known it, believed in it,
and thought, you know, maybe next week
we'll get better at We we you know we
we've we've been at the Sunday worship
every morning forever, but man am I
tempted by 12:45 or 1:30 in the
afternoon to to get back to work or to
an addictive level work about the NFL.
Um
boy, I would treat um Sabbaths
differently and especially digital
intrusions into the Sabbath. Um
dinner time is precious. Man, lock up
your devices and keep them away from the
table and and prioritize that time.
There is a limit to how many trips a
month are really worth it. Uh I lived a
road warrior life for a long time and I
kind of had a rule of thumb that seven
nights a month in a hotel was the
ceiling. Um
but boy, there's a difference between
seven and nine and there's a difference
between seven and five and I took way
way way way too many trips.
Matt And might be convicting for that
man interviewing you, but go on.
Uh
you know. Um family compounds, like man,
have more cousins and figure out how to
live thick with them. There's so many
times when we optimize around things
that are not nearly as important as more
family thickness. Boy, I wish we lived
down the block from my folks.
One of my recent guests was Bart Ehrman,
uh who's New Testament scholar,
well-known uh
as a skeptic who was a Christian.
Uh was evangelical Christian for a time
and lost his Christian faith. And in our
conversation, he talked about um
that the idea that he didn't lose his
faith because he decided that the
Gospels weren't historically reliable,
though that was mostly what we argued
about, right? Um but because of the
problem of evil, of human suffering. And
he specifically talked about unanswered
prayers. And
as, you know, I assume you've prayed for
healing.
Yes, sir.
>> Not to be the guy who just beats the
odds, but to be
the miracle story, right? Um
God hasn't answered those prayers
yet. Are you angry at God ever?
No. Not at all. No. I I wouldn't want a
sovereign God to defer to all of my
prayers with a yes, cuz I'm not
omniscient.
I I don't I don't know what the weaving
together of the tapestry of full
redemption should look like, but I know
going through the period of suffering
that I'm going through um is a benefit
because it is a winnowing. Um I'm filled
with dross, and
I this suffering is not salvific, um but
it's sanctifying, and I'm grateful for
it. Tim Keller, who I know you knew, um
uh who's in my denomination, a
Presbyterian pastor in New York who also
died of pancreatic cancer,
said, "I hate pancreatic cancer.
I would never wish it on anyone, but I
would never want to go back to a time in
my life where I didn't know the prayer
of pancreatic cancer."
Meaning
I now, in the midst of this disease,
know much more the truth of my finitude
than I ever let myself believe in the
past. The hubristic nonsense that I was
actually, yeah, I believe in God
grateful and blessed, but I can build a
storehouse that can be pretty
deistically persuasive. My storehouse
can have enough resources that I can
operate without a need. But that's not
true. I can't I can't keep the orbits
the planets in orbit. I can't I can't
even grow skin on my face.
For the listener or viewer who
whether for Herman's reasons or others
doesn't believe in God,
right? And
finds your cosmic optimism admirable,
but maybe thinks that you're deluding
yourself
on the brink of actual finitude.
What would you What would you say to
that person?
I
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> Let's read the book of Romans together.
Uh
in Romans 1, where Paul's essentially
laying out
a
cataclysmal argument for the structure
of
Christianity against a
Jewish Messianic hopeful backdrop. He
says in in chapter 1, um there are lots
of intellectual arguments you can make
against God, but you kind of have to
start [clears throat] with a fundamental
question about what do you do with this
moral issue of our own conscience?
And does the individual in your
hypothetical really start with the claim
that things are right in your soul? Cuz
I can't relate to that. Things are not
right in my soul.
My soul thinks Ben should be God, and I
want that to die.
Cancer sucks, but I'm pretty grateful
that cancer is a stake against my
delusional self-idolatry.
Do you think you're ready to die?
Do you feel ready?
I don't feel ready, but
to whom would I go? I I have confidence
that
when Jesus says to the disciples, he
didn't want to be identified as the
Messiah yet,
keep these crowds away, you know, don't
tell about the the
water into wine miracle at the feast.
How amazing is it that Jesus' first um
first miracle is a big-ass party. Let's
drink more together.
But he says you can't keep the children
from me.
And we're told that we get to approach
the almighty. We get to approach the
divine
and call him daddy.
Our Father.
That's pretty glorious. And I know that
that's what I need.
Ben
>> [snorts]
>> Sorry.
Happy to get him to open up a can of
whoop-ass.
>> end. Got me. Ben Sasse, thank you for
joining me.
Thanks for having me.
>> [music]